README.md, before:

# roo_time
Microcontroller library for basic management of elapsed time, wall time, and date time with multi-timezone support.
Provides type safety around durations and different time units, guarding against common programming errors like confusing time
units, or confusing 'timestamps' with 'durations'.

Internally, uses microsecond precision, and stores the time as int64_t (in other words, it will not overflow on you as `millis()` does).

The library is designed to work seamlessly with various RTC device drivers. For example, if you have a DS3231 real-time clock, you
can use this library to keep the raw, UTC time in DS3231, and deal with time zones and daylight savings conversions on top of that.

## Compatibility

This library is extensively tested on the ESP32-family microcontrollers. It works both with Arduino and raw esp-idf. It also works on RP2040-based Raspberry Pi Pico.

The library is written in standard C++, and the only platform-dependent function is the one behind Uptime::Now().

## Measuring elapsed time

Example usage:

```cpp
#include "roo_time.h"

using namespace roo_time;

void loop() {
  Uptime now = Uptime::Now();  // Carries microseconds since program start.
  foo(now.inMillis());         // Conveniently convert to various time units, as needed.
  now += Hours(2);             // Basic arithmetics and convenience construction.
  if (now > Hours(2))          // Compile error: don't conflate time instant with duration.
  
  // Measuring elapsed time
  Uptime start = Uptime::Now();
  // ... do something
  Duration elapsed = Uptime::Now() - start;
  if (elapsed > Minutes(2)) {  // This is now OK.
    // ...
  }
  // ...
}
```

## Measuring wall time

The library works well with device-specific libraries, via the base abstraction of a 'WallTimeClock'. On ESP chips, you can use
'SystemClock' to read time from NTP servers via WiFi. For DS3231, you can use a companion library  [roo_time_ds3231](http://github.com/dejwk/roo_time_ds3231).
If you have another time source, you can use it by implementing a simple adapter:

```cpp
#include "my_rtc_time_lib.h"
#include "roo_time.h"

using namespace roo_time;

class MyClock : public WallTimeClock {
 public:
  // optional; initializes the driver.
  void begin() {
    rtc_.begin();
  }
  
  WallTime now() const override {
    // Read time, e.g. as milliseconds since Epoch.
    return WallTime(Millis(rtc_.millisSinceEpoch()));
  }

 private:
  MyRtcDevice rtc_;
};

```

If your device returns date/time components (year, month, day, etc.), you can convert them to 'WallTime' using the
conversion functions described below. (Also, see the [roo_time_ds3231](http://github.com/dejwk/roo_time_ds3231) library for a concrete illustration).

Once you have an implementation of the 'WallTimeClock', you can use it like this:

```cpp
MyClock clock;  // Or, SystemClock, or Ds3231Clock, etc.

void setup() {
  clock.begin();
}

void loop() {
  WallTime now = clock.now();
  WallTime tomorrow = now + Hours(24);
  int64_t seconds_since_epoch = now.sinceEpoch().toSeconds();
  // ...
}
```

## Date / time conversion

You can specify datetimes, and convert them from and to wall time:

```cpp
// Get a wall time of a specified calendar datetime.
DateTime independence_day(2021, 7, 4, TimeZone(Hours(-7)));
WallTime wt = independence_day.wallTime();

// Get current time in a specified timezone.
DateTime now(clock.now(), TimeZone(Hours(2));
foo(now.year(), now.month(), now.day(), now.hour(), now.minute(), now.second());

if (now.dayOfWeek() == FRIDAY) { /* I like Fridays! */ }

```

## Timezones and daylight savings

Timezone is just a type-safe duration wrapper:

```cpp
static const Timezone CEST(Hours(2)); 
```

Daylight saving rules are not explicitly supported, because they are very complicated and change
often. It is, however, reasonably simple to implement the logic yourself. For example, in Poland,
summer time begins at 2AM local time on the last Sunday of March, and it ends at 3AM local time
on the last Sunday of October. The appropriate daylight-savings-aware clock looks like this:

```cpp
Duration utcOffset(WallTime t) {
  int16_t y = DateTime(t, timezone::UTC).year();
  // Figure out the day of the week of the last day of March that year.
  DateTime mar31(y, 3, 31, timezone::UTC);
  // Figure out the down-offset from mar31 to the 2AM last Sunday of March.
  // Keep in mind that 2AM is 1AM UTC.
  DayOfWeek march31dow = mar31.dayOfWeek();
  WallTime summerStart = mar31.wallTime() - Hours(24 * march31dow) + Hours(1);
  // Similar calculation for the winter time. Note that 3AM is now 1AM UTC.
  DateTime oct31(y, 10, 31, timezone::UTC);
  DayOfWeek oct31dow = oct31.dayOfWeek();
  WallTime summerEnd = oct31.wallTime() - Hours(24 * oct31dow) + Hours(1);
  // Now, see if the specified time point is within the summer time range.
  return t >= summerStart && t < summerEnd ? Hours(2) : Hours(3);
}

class DSTWatch {
 public:
  DSTWatch(WallTimeClock& clock) : clock_(clock) {}
 
  DateTime nowLocal() {
    WallTime t = clock_.now();
    return DateTime(t, TimeZone(utcOffset(t)));
  }
  
 private:
  WallTimeClock& clock_;
};
```

## Type safety

The library will protect you from making common mistakes, such as mixing up time units,
mixing up uptime (i.e. the time since the device is running) with wall time (i.e. duration
since Epoch), and mixing up durations with time points:

```cpp
clock.now() - Uptime::Now();  // ERROR: can't mix up wall time and uptime.
clock.now() - (Uptime::Now() - Uptime::Start());  // Now OK; explicitly converted to an duration.
                                                  // Returns the wall time of last restart.
Uptime::Now() + 20;           // ERROR: 20 of what?
Uptime::Now() + Seconds(20);  // Now OK.
```

## Performance

The Uptime and WallTime classes are trivial wrappers around int64.
For such classes, construction/destruction has zero cost, as it is completely
optimized away. The compiler will generate code that will look exactly as if
you directly operated on the int64.

## Program size overhead

The compiler is good at omitting stuff you don't use. For example, if you never call any
date conversion function, it will have zero effect on your binary size. And, because
of aggressive optimization mentioned above, the cost of using basic functionality
of WallTime and Uptime is essentially zero in comparison to the equivalent code using
integer types directly.

Commit message:

Added documentation comments, and fixed the rounding behavior for negative durations.

README.md, after:

# roo_time
Microcontroller library for basic management of elapsed time, wall time, and date time with multi-timezone support.
Provides type safety around durations and different time units, guarding against common programming errors like confusing time
units, or confusing 'timestamps' with 'durations'.

Internally, uses microsecond precision, and stores the time as int64_t (in other words, it will not overflow on you as `millis()` does).

The library is designed to work seamlessly with various RTC device drivers. For example, if you have a DS3231 real-time clock, you
can use this library to keep the raw, UTC time in DS3231, and deal with time zones and daylight savings conversions on top of that.

## Compatibility

This library is extensively tested on the ESP32-family microcontrollers. It works both with Arduino and raw esp-idf. It also works on RP2040-based Raspberry Pi Pico.

The library is written in standard C++, and the only platform-dependent function is the one behind Uptime::Now().

## Measuring elapsed time

Example usage:

```cpp
#include "roo_time.h"

using namespace roo_time;

void loop() {
  Uptime now = Uptime::Now();  // Carries microseconds since program start.
  foo(now.inMillis());         // Conveniently convert to various time units, as needed.
  now += Hours(2);             // Basic arithmetics and convenience construction.
  if (now > Hours(2))          // Compile error: don't conflate time instant with duration.
  
  // Measuring elapsed time
  Uptime start = Uptime::Now();
  // ... do something
  Duration elapsed = Uptime::Now() - start;
  if (elapsed > Minutes(2)) {  // This is now OK.
    // ...
  }
  // ...
}
```

## Measuring wall time

The library works well with device-specific libraries, via the base abstraction of a 'WallTimeClock'. On ESP chips, you can use
'SystemClock' to read time from NTP servers via WiFi. For DS3231, you can use a companion library  [roo_time_ds3231](http://github.com/dejwk/roo_time_ds3231).
If you have another time source, you can use it by implementing a simple adapter:

```cpp
#include "my_rtc_time_lib.h"
#include "roo_time.h"

using namespace roo_time;

class MyClock : public WallTimeClock {
 public:
  // optional; initializes the driver.
  void begin() {
    rtc_.begin();
  }
  
  WallTime now() const override {
    // Read time, e.g. as milliseconds since Epoch.
    return WallTime(Millis(rtc_.millisSinceEpoch()));
  }

 private:
  MyRtcDevice rtc_;
};

```

If your device returns date/time components (year, month, day, etc.), you can convert them to 'WallTime' using the
conversion functions described below. (Also, see the [roo_time_ds3231](http://github.com/dejwk/roo_time_ds3231) library for a concrete illustration).

Once you have an implementation of the 'WallTimeClock', you can use it like this:

```cpp
MyClock clock;  // Or, SystemClock, or Ds3231Clock, etc.

void setup() {
  clock.begin();
}

void loop() {
  WallTime now = clock.now();
  WallTime tomorrow = now + Hours(24);
  int64_t seconds_since_epoch = now.sinceEpoch().toSeconds();
  // ...
}
```

## Date / time conversion

You can specify datetimes, and convert them from and to wall time:

```cpp
// Get a wall time of a specified calendar datetime.
DateTime independence_day(2021, 7, 4, TimeZone(Hours(-7)));
WallTime wt = independence_day.wallTime();

// Get current time in a specified timezone.
DateTime now(clock.now(), TimeZone(Hours(2));
foo(now.year(), now.month(), now.day(), now.hour(), now.minute(), now.second());

if (now.dayOfWeek() == FRIDAY) { /* I like Fridays! */ }

```

## Timezones and daylight savings

Timezone is just a type-safe duration wrapper:

```cpp
static const Timezone CEST(Hours(2)); 
```

Daylight saving rules are not explicitly supported, because they are very complicated and change
often. It is, however, reasonably simple to implement the logic yourself. For example, in Poland,
summer time begins at 2AM local time on the last Sunday of March, and it ends at 3AM local time
on the last Sunday of October. The appropriate daylight-savings-aware clock looks like this:

```cpp
Duration utcOffset(WallTime t) {
  int16_t y = DateTime(t, timezone::UTC).year();
  // Figure out the day of the week of the last day of March that year.
  DateTime mar31(y, 3, 31, timezone::UTC);
  // Figure out the down-offset from mar31 to the 2AM last Sunday of March.
  // Keep in mind that 2AM is 1AM UTC.
  DayOfWeek march31dow = mar31.dayOfWeek();
  WallTime summerStart = mar31.wallTime() - Hours(24 * march31dow) + Hours(1);
  // Similar calculation for the winter time. Note that 3AM is now 1AM UTC.
  DateTime oct31(y, 10, 31, timezone::UTC);
  DayOfWeek oct31dow = oct31.dayOfWeek();
  WallTime summerEnd = oct31.wallTime() - Hours(24 * oct31dow) + Hours(1);
  // Now, see if the specified time point is within the summer time range.
  return t >= summerStart && t < summerEnd ? Hours(2) : Hours(3);
}

class DSTWatch {
 public:
  DSTWatch(WallTimeClock& clock) : clock_(clock) {}
 
  DateTime nowLocal() {
    WallTime t = clock_.now();
    return DateTime(t, TimeZone(utcOffset(t)));
  }
  
 private:
  WallTimeClock& clock_;
};
```

## Type safety

The library will protect you from making common mistakes, such as mixing up time units,
mixing up uptime (i.e. the time since the device is running) with wall time (i.e. duration
since Epoch), and mixing up durations with time points:

```cpp
clock.now() - Uptime::Now();  // ERROR: can't mix up wall time and uptime.
clock.now() - (Uptime::Now() - Uptime::Start());  // Now OK; explicitly converted to an duration.
                                                  // Returns the wall time of last restart.
Uptime::Now() + 20;           // ERROR: 20 of what?
Uptime::Now() + Seconds(20);  // Now OK.
```

## Rounding semantics

`Duration` narrowing conversions expose three rounding modes:

- `inXxx()` and `inXxxRoundedDown()` round **toward zero**.
- `inXxxRoundedUp()` rounds **away from zero**.
- `inXxxRoundedNearest()` rounds to nearest, with ties (exact half) **away from zero**.

Examples for milliseconds:

- `Micros(1501).inMillisRoundedDown()` is `1`, `Micros(-1501).inMillisRoundedDown()` is `-1`.
- `Micros(1501).inMillisRoundedUp()` is `2`, `Micros(-1501).inMillisRoundedUp()` is `-2`.
- `Micros(500).inMillisRoundedNearest()` is `1`, `Micros(-500).inMillisRoundedNearest()` is `-1`.

## Performance

The Uptime and WallTime classes are trivial wrappers around int64.
For such classes, construction/destruction has zero cost, as it is completely
optimized away. The compiler will generate code that will look exactly as if
you directly operated on the int64.

## Program size overhead

The compiler is good at omitting stuff you don't use. For example, if you never call any
date conversion function, it will have zero effect on your binary size. And, because
of aggressive optimization mentioned above, the cost of using basic functionality
of WallTime and Uptime is essentially zero in comparison to the equivalent code using
integer types directly.
